---
title: "Derivation of Spherical Harmonics Basis Functions Part 1"
data: 2020-12-6
tags: [spherical-harmonics]
excerpt: "Detailed derivations of SH basis functions."
mathjax: "true"
---

##### Note: This post assumes the reader is familiar with basis functions, integrals, and a few other mathematical concepts.

## Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Legendre Polynomials](#legendre)
3. [Spherical Harmonics](#sh)

## Introduction <a name="introduction"></a>



## Legendre Polynomials <a name="legendre"></a>

Legendre polynomials can be defined in a few ways, in physics they appear when solving Laplace's equation in spherical coordinates. They are also the solution to [Legendre's differential equation](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/LegendreDifferentialEquation.html). The Wikipedia entry for Legendre's polynomial also defines them by construction using orthogonal polynomials. Rodrigues' formula allows us to obtain the actual polynomial associated to each Legendre polynomial $P_n(x)$. The actual derivation of the Legendre polynomials is left to another post but for completeness here's Rodrigues' formula in terms of derivatives. 

$$
P_n(x) = \frac{1}{2^n n!} \frac{d^n}{dx^n} (x^2 - 1)^n
$$

And in terms of the binomial coefficient

$$
P_n(x) = \frac{1}{2^n}\sum_{k=0}^{n} {n \choose k}^2 (x - 1) ^ {n-k} (x+1)^k
$$

### Associated Legendre Polynomials and Legendre Function

A more general version of the Legendre differential equation exists and its solution is called associated Legendre polynomials. The definition in terms of derivatives is:

$$
P_\ell^m(x) = (-1)^m  (1 - x^2)^{m/2}  \frac{d^m}{dx^m} P_\ell(x)
$$

and substituting in the definition of Legendre polynomials:

$$
P_\ell^m(x) = (-1)^m \frac{1}{2^\ell \ell!} (1 - x^2)^{m/2}  \frac{d^{m+\ell}}{dx^{m+\ell}} (x^2 - 1)^\ell
$$

Where $(-1)^m$ is called the Condon-Shortley phase and is optional, $m$ is the order and $\ell$ the degree. For it to be a polynomial, $m$ and $\ell$ need to be integers, $m$ needs to be even and $0 \leq m \leq \ell$. Setting $m=0$ gives back the Legendre polynomials. In the general cases, with no restrictions on $m$ and $\ell$, $P_\ell^m$ is called Legendre function. We can extend the definition to include negative $m$ values, such that $-\ell \leq m \leq \ell$ with

$$
P_\ell^{-m}(x) = (-1)^m \frac{(\ell - m)!}{(\ell + m)!} P_\ell^m(x)
$$





## Spherical Harmonics <a name="sh"></a>

## Complex SH Basis

## Real components


## References
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legendre_polynomials
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associated_Legendre_polynomials
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spherical_harmonics
 

Here's some basic test.

And here's some *italics*

Here's some **bold** text.

What about a [link](https://github.com/Beatthezombie/beatthezombie.github.io)

Here's a bulleted list:
* first
* second
* third

1. first
2. second
3. third

Python code block:
```python
import numpy as np

def test_function(x,y):
z = np.sum(x,y)
return z
```

inline code  `x+y`  

$$ e^{i \pi} = -1 $$

inline math $$ e^{i \pi} = -1 $$